# Daedalus Installer Update Procedure

After the installers are built in CI, they need to be copied to the
installer updates S3 bucket, and an update proposal needs to be
submitted to the cardano-sl network.  The update bucket itself is
defined in configuration yaml file under the `installer-bucket` key.
In each of the networks which may use this procedure (mainnet,
testnet, staging), the configuration yaml file can be found as
`config.yaml` which is a symlink to the underlying network's yaml
file.

This is how wallet clients will self-update.

## Intended Audience

This document is mainly intended for use by IOHK DevOps working from
the mainnet, staging mainnet, or testnet deployers.

It can also be used for testing the update system against a [developer
cluster](./Developer-clusters-HOWTO.md).

## Running the scripts

`ssh` into the deployer get a `nix-shell` in the `iohk-ops` checkout.

    # Change directory into the cluster the proposal will be made on
    cd mainnet
    nix-shell -A withAuxx

You can see the list of subcommands with:

    io update-proposal --help

Each `update-proposal` subcommand has its own usage information
accessible with the `--help` option.

| **Subcommand**      | **Synopsis**                                        |
| ------------------- | --------------------------------------------------- |
| init                | Create template config file and working directory.  |
| find-installers     | Download installer files from the Daedalus build.   |
| sign-installers     | Sign downloaded installer files with GPG.           |
| upload-s3           | Upload installer files to the S3 bucket.            |
| set-version-json    | Update the version info file in the the S3 bucket.  |
| submit              | Send update proposal transaction to the network.    |

The commands are run in order with manual checks between each step.

## Requirements

1. The keys for core nodes should be in the `keys` subdirectory.

2. You need to know the following things:

   * Daedalus revision to propose. **Note:** this should be the same
     revision as specified in the release candidate announcement and
     signed off by QA.
   * The `lastKnownBlockVersion`, according to the table below.
   * The `voterIndex`, according to the table below.
   * Signing key passphrase (optional).
   * IP address of a privileged relay (use `io info`).

## 1. Initialise params

    io -c NETWORK.yaml update-proposal init [DATE] --revision REVISION --block-version VER --voter-index N --release-notes /dev/null

Where `-c NETWORK.yaml` can be omitted from the command if there is
already a `config.yaml` file symlinked to the proper network
configuration yaml file in the cluster directory.

Where *DATE* is a string which identifies the update proposal. By
default it will be today's date in `YYYY-MM-DD` format. The other
values should be set as required.

Where *REVISION* is the daedalus repo commit from the revision that
the proposal will be submitted for.  This is also the same revision
that the `io find-installers -r REVISION` command would have used to
generate the email for QA.

Where *VER* from --block-version can be obtained from the logs of
the network the proposal will be made on, such as by examining:
`journalctl -f -u cardano-node -o cat` for the `block: v$VER` string.

Where *N* from --voter-index is a number from 0 to 6, representing
voting keys of the core nodes.  Note that once a voter index is
utilized for a proposal, the same voter index number cannot be
utilized again for that epoch or the proposal will be rejected.

This command will create a template config file like
`update-proposals/mainnet-2018-04-03/params.yaml`.

The directory that the config file is created in is called the
*work dir*. It will contain logs, a node db, keys, installers, hashes,
and other information generated by the update proposal.

Open `params.yaml` in the work dir and double-check that it has
correct values. The contents will look similar to this:

    voterIndex: 2
    daedalusRevision: 32daff63e1fb1590cd7320e4253e61b2a47b0963
    lastKnownBlockVersion: '0.1.0'

## 2. Download installer files from CI

    io -c NETWORK.yaml update-proposal find-installers DATE

The *DATE* parameter is required to be specified and should be the
same as what was reported after running the `init` step.

This will locate the CI builds for the previously configured revision
and download their installer artifacts to the `installers`
subdirectory of the work dir. It will then use the `file` program to
check that they are actually installers for the correct platform, and
calculate their hashes using both `cardano-auxx` and `sha256sum`.

After it has finished, inspect the following values in `params.yaml`:

1. The `grApplicationVersion` value must be a value greater than all
   previous update proposals on the target cluster. This is recorded
   in [Daedalus Installer History](https://github.com/input-output-hk/internal-documentation/wiki/Daedalus-installer-history).

2. The `grApplicationVersion` found should match what you have set in
   `cardano-sl`.

3. The `ciResultBuildNumber` for all `ciResults` should be the correct
   build.

4. The `grCardanoCommit` value should match `cardano-sl-src.json` in
   the Daedalus tree.

5. The installer filenames should look normal, have the right network
   and versions, and correspond to the same build as was approved for
   release by QA (if updating mainnet installers).

6. The `installerHashes` and `installerSHA256` values should be
   present.

These values will also be summarised in the file `wiki.md` within the
work dir.

**Important**: If an update proposal is made with the wrong
`applicationVersion`, the update mechanism may fail and users will be
required to intervene by manually installing an update.

### When there is more than one build for the chosen revision

Sometimes there can be multiple builds corresponding to a given
Daedalus revision.

In this case, `find-installers` will list the builds and then exit
without downloading anything. You need to re-run the command with
`--buildkite-build-num` or `--appveyor-build-num` arguments added.

## 3. Sign executables with HSM

From a local machine, use the release-build.nix file of the
daedalus repo, at the same commit as the proposal, to sign the Windows
executables:

`nix-build release-build.nix --argstr buildNum BUILDNUM --allow-unsafe-native-code-during-evaluation`

The build process will utilize ssh to the HSM signing server via server
`HSM` which can be defined to the current HSM server in an ssh config file.

Once the Windows HSM signed binary has completed building on a local machine,
remove the symlink on the deployer for the existing non-HSM signed
binary, found in dir: update-proposal/$CLUSTER-$DATE/installers/

Replace the non-HSM signed symlink with the locally built HSM
signed binary using scp to push the signed binary to
the deployer; verify size and expected hash on the deployer.

With HSM signed binary or binaries now in place on the deployer, the
`installerHashes` and `installerSHA256` hashes for each HSM signed binary
need to be updated in the params.yaml file found in dir:
update-proposal/$CLUSTER-$DATE/

The correct hashes to update in the params.yaml file can be generated
with the following commands:

For `installerHashes` hashes:
`cardano-auxx cmd --commands 'hash-installer $HSMBINARY'`

For `installerSHA256` hashes:
`sha256sum $HSMBINARY`


## 4. Sign installer files with GPG

This step requires a signing key available on the deployer host.

    io -c NETWORK.yaml update-proposal sign-installers -u signing.authority@iohk.io DATE

Where the the `-u` parameter (here shown as signing.authority@iohk.io) can be
found by running `gpg -K` and obtaining the email address associated
with the signing key.

If the signing key is protected with a passphrase, you will be prompted to enter it.

This will place detached signatures in `.asc` files within the work
dir. There should be one `.asc` file produced for each binary. These will be
uploaded to S3 at the same time as the installer files.


## 5. Upload installer files to the S3 update bucket

    io -c NETWORK.yaml update-proposal upload-s3 DATE

This will upload the hashed installers to S3, under their original
filename, as well as by their hash.

There will also be a file `daedalus-latest-version.json` added to the
work dir with download links and SHA-256 hashes.

*Hint*: The destination S3 bucket is configured with the
`installer-bucket` value in `NETWORK.yaml`. You can edit this for
debugging purposes.


### Troubleshooting

If you get an error like this: `AesonException "Error in $['mainnet_staging_short_epoch_wallet_win64']: key \"infra\" not present")`,
ensure that the `cardano-sl-auxx` that you are using matches that
cardano-sl version used by Daedalus.

If you get an error like the following, or a different s3 upload related error:

```
[ServiceError] {
  service    = S3
  status     = 403 Forbidden
  code       = SignatureDoesNotMatch
  message    = Just The request signature we calculated does not match the signature you provided. Check your key and signing method.
  request-id = Just $VALUE
}
```

The files can be uploaded manually with the aws cli, for example:

First, upload the binaries and their `.asc` files:
```
for x in update-proposals/$CLUSTER-$DATE/installers/*; do aws s3 cp $x s3://$INSTALLER_BUCKET/; done
```

Second, upload each binary again, this time naming the target binary
as its `installerHashes` value. Example:
```
aws s3 cp update-proposals/$CLUSTER-$DATE/installers/$BINARY s3://$INSTALLER_BUCKET/$INSTALLERHASHES_HASH
```

## 6. Update version JSON

    io -c NETWORK.yaml update-proposal set-version-json DATE

This will drop the previously created `daedalus-latest-version.json`
into the S3 bucket. If done with the mainnet settings, it will have
the effect of immediately updating the download links on
[The Daedalus Wallet download page](https://daedaluswallet.io/#download).

## 7. Propose the update and vote in favor using majority stake

Find the private IP address of a *core node*. This is
normally private info so don't leak it.

On the deployer, but in a different shell than the one planned to
execute the proposal on, open a tunnel to the core node, port 3000
from the deployer with the following command:

`nixops ssh -d $CLUSTER $CORENAME -L 3000:$CORE_INTERNAL_IP:3000`

Then, execute the update proposal from the original shell

    io -c NETWORK.yaml update-proposal submit DATE --relay-ip 127.0.0.1
        [--without-linux] [--without-macos] [--without-windows]

Exit the ssh session in the other shell once the proposal update
has been submitted successfully to end the ssh tunnel to the core
node.

## Notarization for Mac Catalina

Steps for MacOS notarization (must be done on the MacOS guest signing servers):

1. scp or otherwise push/pull the installer to `mac-mini-<1|2>-signing`

2. ssh to the `mac-mini-<1|2>-signing` guest where the scp pushed the file above

3. Switch to the appropriate user and path of the installer package if not already there (these notarize staple commands will run ok as nixos or root user)

4. Check the sha256 is expected as from the deployer params.yaml update proposal file and/or direct sha256 of the package file on the appropriate deployer

5. Do the notarization (the $USER and $PASSWORD are in lastpass vault under `apple-notary-pass`)
```
xcrun altool --notarize-app \
  --primary-bundle-id "io.iohk.daedalus.pkg" \
  --username "$USER" \
  --password "$PASSWORD" \
  --file "$DAEDALUS_INSTALLER_FILE"
```

6. Optional: Check status:
  `xcrun altool --notarization-history 0 -u "$USER" -p "$PASSWORD"`  

7. Optional: Get further information:
```
# RequestUUID will have been provided in the initial cmd output
xcrun altool --notarization-info $REQUESTUUID -u "$USER"
```

More docs:
https://developer.apple.com/documentation/xcode/notarizing_your_app_before_distribution/customizing_the_notarization_workflow?language=objc


**Note from 2018-12-17**
By default, installers will be proposed for Linux, Windows and macOS.
Use the `--without-OS` flag to exclude certain installers from the
update proposal.

This will generate a new node db, copy keys from the top-level `keys`
directory, then "rearrange" the copied keys.

It will then send a transaction to the given relay.

Note the proposal ID which is printed at the end of the output.

If the update proposal was successful, the ratified proposal will take
effect in _k_ slots time, where _k_ is the security parameter. On
mainnet/staging/testnet with _k=2160_ and 20 second slot duration,
this will be 12 hours.

## 8. Testing proposal acceptance

*Useful generic search:* [keywords](https://papertrailapp.com/groups/6487901/events?q=UpdateProposal%20OR%20UpdateVote%20OR%20Processing%20of%20proposal%20OR%20New%20vote%20OR%20Stakes%20of%20proposal%20OR%20Verifying%20stake%20for%20proposal%20OR%20Proposal%20is%20confirmed%20OR%20is%20rejected%2C%20the%20reason%20is)

1. Search Papertrail for `We'll request data for key Tagged (UpdateProposal,[UpdateVote])` and confirm it references the first 8 chars of the proposal ID from the previous step.
2. Search Papertrail for `Processing of proposal csl-daedalus:` and confirm that
    1. the number following `:` matches the intended `applicationVersion`
    2. the correct `UpId:` is referenced
    3. the tags for the supported platforms are mentioned: `tags: [win64, macos64, linux]`
    4. matching lines end with `is successful`

### Testing for proposal confirmation

12 hours after proposal acceptance, it should be confirmed.

Search papertrail for `Proposal 6e2f23c1 is confirmed` on a core node, using the first 8 characters of the proposal ID from the previous step.


## 9. Testing the update

Work in progress: [DEVOPS-651](https://iohk.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issue/DEVOPS-651).

This is also covered in [how-to/test-update-system.md](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/develop/docs/how-to/test-update-system.md#check-update-taken-by-wallet), section *Check update taken by wallet*.


## 10. Update the wiki

Copy the contents of `wiki.md` from the work dir and paste into
[Daedalus Installer History](https://github.com/input-output-hk/internal-documentation/wiki/Daedalus-installer-history).

Also update any other documentation which is missing or out of date.


## Block version table

The `lastKnownBlockVersion` reflects the current adopted protocol
version of the network. Use the following values depending on the
network where the update will be proposed.

| Network | `lastKnownBlockVersion` |
|:--------| -----------------------:|
| mainnet |                 `0.2.0` |
| staging |                 `0.2.0` |
| testnet |                 `0.1.0` |


## Voter index

The update proposal procedure requires a voter index which selects the
secret key used to sign the update proposal.

**Note:** The `voterIndex` needs to be *≥ 0 and < 7* (where 7 is the
number of core nodes), otherwise you will receive the error
`Prelude.!!: index too large`.


## See also

* [Cardano SL Updater](https://cardanodocs.com/technical/updater/)

* [Previously released versions](https://github.com/input-output-hk/internal-documentation/wiki/Daedalus-installer-history)

* [cardano-sl/how-to/test-update-system.md](https://github.com/input-output-hk/cardano-sl/blob/develop/docs/how-to/test-update-system.md#propose-update--vote-for-it)

[DEVOPS-656]: https://iohk.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issue/DEVOPS-656
[DEVOPS-709]: https://iohk.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issue/DEVOPS-709
[DEVOPS-710]: https://iohk.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issue/DEVOPS-710
[DEVOPS-816]: https://iohk.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issue/DEVOPS-816
[DEVOPS-868]: https://iohk.myjetbrains.com/youtrack/issue/DEVOPS-868

## Future automation

1. The `lastKnownBlockVersion` parameter should be investigated to
   determine whether it is really needed to be configured, or can be
   determined from the configuration.

2. When printing paths to *work dir*, show them as relative to the
   `iohk-ops` checkout, rather than as absolute paths.

3. Automatically make sure that the version of auxx and tools used
   corresponds to the `cardano-sl` version of Daedalus. Currently, the
   version used is that built by the nix-shell.

4. [DEVOPS-816][] Automated testing of update proposals.
